cli: program upgrade with offline signing (--sign-only mode) (#33860)
solana-labs/solana: docs/src/cli/deploy-a-program.md

to:

- Initialize a program account
- Upload the program's shared object (the program binary `.so`) to the program account's data buffer

> - (optional) Verify the uploaded program

Author: Will do, one the same note - should I add [this](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860#discussion_r1412090875) in there too ?

> - (optional) Verify the uploaded program

Author: Moved changed related to other sections in the docs to a separate PR: https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/34307

> - (optional) Verify the uploaded program

Reviewer: Great, thanks!

> ### Redeploy a program

Author: We also probably want to update/extend https://github.com/norwnd/solana/blob/program-sign-only/docs/src/cli/deploy-a-program.md#redeploy-a-program section to document `solana program upgrade` as "preferred" upgrade method ?

`--buffer-authority` and `--upgrade-authority` correspond to offline signer (key-pair).

The general process is as follows:
1) (use online machine) create buffer
2) (use online machine) upgrade buffer authority to offline signer
3) (optional, use a separate online machine) verify the actual buffer on-chain contents
4) (use offline machine) get a signature for your intent to create or upgrade program
5) (use online machine) use this signature to build and broadcast create/upgrade transactions on-chain

```bash
# (1) (use online machine) create buffer
solana program write-buffer <PROGRAM_FILEPATH>

# (2) (use online machine) upgrade buffer authority to offline signer
solana program set-buffer-authority <PUB_KEY> --new-buffer-authority <PUB_KEY>
```

- note, above we have to issue a separate `set-buffer-authority` command (using online machine) to change authority to
  be that of offline signer because we don't have access to offline signer private key to sign up as buffer authority
  when running `solana program write-buffer` command using online machine (offline signer private key is stored on

>   offline machine)

Author: Gotta say, this behavior seems a bit weird to me (not being able to specify the desired buffer authority from the get go), 

any reason for why this is the way it is (perhaps somehow can be fixed) ?

Note, the buffer's authority must match the program's upgrade authority.

Buffers also support `show` and `dump` just like programs do.

### Upgrading program using offline signer as authority

Some security models require separating the signing process from the transaction broadcast, such that the signing keys can be completely disconnected from any network, also known as [offline signing](../offline-signing.md).

This section describes how a program developer can use offline signing to upgrade their program, unlike the [previous section](deploy-a-program.md#redeploy-a-program), which assumes the machine is connected to the internet, aka online signing.

Note that only the `upgrade` command can be performed in offline mode. The initial program deployment **must** be performed from an online machine, and only subsequent program upgrades can leverage offline signing.

Assuming your program has been deployed and its upgrade authority has been changed to an
offline signer, 

> a typical setup would consist of 3 different signers (pairs of keys):

Reviewer: micro-nit after the change:
```suggestion
a typical setup would consist of 2 different signers:
```

Author: Applied in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/38c85c292aace6bcfcc3ce9614024ef527744c61

### Upgrading program using offline signer as authority

Some security models require separating the signing process from the transaction broadcast, such that the signing keys can be completely disconnected from any network, also known as [offline signing](../offline-signing.md).

This section describes how a program developer can use offline signing to upgrade their program, unlike the [previous section](deploy-a-program.md#redeploy-a-program), which assumes the machine is connected to the internet, aka online signing.

Note that only the `upgrade` command can be performed in offline mode. The initial program deployment **must** be performed from an online machine, and only subsequent program upgrades can leverage offline signing.

Assuming your program has been deployed and its upgrade authority has been changed to an
offline signer, 
a typical setup would consist of 2 different signers:
- online signer (fee payer for uploading program buffer and upgrading program)
- offline signer (program upgrade authority)

The general process is as follows:
1. (online) create buffer and write new program to it
2. (online) upgrade buffer authority to offline signer

> 3. (optional, online) verify the actual buffer on-chain contents

Author: Applied in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/621297fba77f51494b89621486b75f558a39fe42

4. (offline) sign a transaction to upgrade the program

> 5. (online) use this signature to broadcast upgrade transaction

Author: Applied in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/621297fba77f51494b89621486b75f558a39fe42

```bash
# (1) (use online machine) create buffer
solana program write-buffer <PROGRAM_FILEPATH>

> # (2) (use online machine) upgrade buffer authority to offline signer

Author: Applied in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/621297fba77f51494b89621486b75f558a39fe42

solana program set-buffer-authority <BUFFER_PUBKEY> --new-buffer-authority <OFFLINE_SIGNER_PUBKEY>
```

(3) (optional) You may verify that the uploaded program matches the built binary. See 
[dumping a program to a file](deploy-a-program.md#dumping-a-program-to-a-file) for more information and details.

```bash

> # or (4) (use offline machine) get a signature for your intent to upgrade program

Author: Whoops, that's also an artifact I missed from "the days it was meant to work with `deploy`", removed in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/621297fba77f51494b89621486b75f558a39fe42

solana program upgrade <BUFFER_PUBKEY> <PROGRAM_ID> --sign-only --fee-payer <ONLINE_SIGNER_PUBKEY> --upgrade-authority <OFFLINE_SIGNER> --blockhash <VALUE>

> # or (5) (use online machine) use this signature to build and broadcast upgrade transactions on-chain

Author: Applied in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/621297fba77f51494b89621486b75f558a39fe42

solana program upgrade <BUFFER_PUBKEY> <PROGRAM_ID> --fee-payer <ONLINE_SIGNER> --upgrade-authority <OFFLINE_SIGNER_PUBKEY> --blockhash <VALUE> --signer <OFFLINE_SIGNER_PUBKEY>:<OFFLINE_SIGNER_SIGNATURE>
```
Note:
- typically, the output of the previous command(s) will contain some values useful in subsequent commands, e.g. 
  `--program-id`, `--buffer`, `--signer`
- you need to specify matching (or corresponding) values for params with same names (`--fee-payer`, `--program-id`, 
  `--upgrade-authority`, `--buffer`, `--blockhash`) in offline/online modes
- you should pre-fill every value except for `blockhash` ahead of time, and once you are ready to act - you'll need to 

>   look up fresh `blockhash` and paste it in quickly + do your signing, you have ~60 seconds before `blockhash` expires. 

Reviewer: micro-nits:
```suggestion
  look up a recent `blockhash` and paste it in to generate the offline transaction signature. The `blockhash` expires after ~60 seconds. 
```

Author: Applied in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/621297fba77f51494b89621486b75f558a39fe42

solana program deploy --program-id <PROGRAM_ADDRESS> --buffer <BUFFER_ADDRESS>
```

Note, the buffer's authority must match the program's upgrade authority. Also, upon successful deploy
buffer accounts contents are copied into program accounts and are erased from blockchain.

Buffers also support `show` and `dump` just like programs do.

### Upgrading program using offline signer as authority

Storing private key(s) on machine without internet access (offline signer) is much safer compared to
storing them on machine with internet access (online signer), this section describes how program developer
can use offline machine (offline signer) to sign-off on his program `upgrade` to get a **higher degree of
security** (compared to typical upgrade flow described in [this section](deploy-a-program.md#redeploy-a-program)
which assumes the usage of machine connected to internet - aka online signer). Note, currently only `upgrade`
operation can be performed in "offline" mode, initial program `deploy` **must** be performed using online machine
and only subsequent program upgrades can leverage offline signing. For a first time deploy it is **recommended** 

> to [change program's upgrade authority (using `--skip-new-upgrade-authority-signer-check` option)](deploy-a-program.md#set-a-programs-upgrade-authority)

Author: > We should also support offline signing for set-upgrade-authority too.

Yep, do you prefer a separate follow-up PR for this ^ (seems cleaner to merge it separately) ?

> From a safety perspective, it's not great to use --skip-new-upgrade-authority-signer-check since there's a possibility of getting the address wrong.

Right, I've mentioned this in https://github.com/norwnd/solana/blob/program-sign-only/docs/src/cli/deploy-a-program.md#set-a-programs-upgrade-authority, can't think of a simple way to address this, but one option would be to:
- instead of using `--skip-new-upgrade-authority-signer-check` flag require a signature from `new-upgrade-authority` (not just his pubkey) - which essentially means User "proves" to Cli he is indeed in control of new upgrade authority - which should address this issue, at least to some extent

Any thoughts on this ? Perhaps we'd want to create an issue for this so we don't forget about it.

> to [change program's upgrade authority (using `--skip-new-upgrade-authority-signer-check` option)](deploy-a-program.md#set-a-programs-upgrade-authority)

Reviewer: > Yep, do you prefer a separate follow-up PR for this ^ (seems cleaner to merge it separately) ?

Yeah that'll be much better, thanks, I created #34312 to track it

to offline signer, so that future program upgrades will only be possible with a signature of private key residing on 

> offline machine.

Author: Applied in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/3f8dd632196d0f0cf1c792d9ed4ff493ee0d8212

Assuming your program has been deployed (using online machine) and its upgrade authority has been changed to
offline signer (a signer whose private key is generated and stays on machine **disconnected** from internet), 
a typical setup would consist of 3 different signers (pairs of keys):
- online signer (used as fee payer for deploying program buffer, deploying/upgrading program itself)
- offline signer (serves as authority over program upgrades, protects program upgrades from certain 
  types of attacks), make sure to have a **secure** backup of this signer

> - program signer (typically, generated when program has been compiled into `.so` file)

Author: Yeah, probably unnecessary detail, removed in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/3f8dd632196d0f0cf1c792d9ed4ff493ee0d8212

The general process is as follows:
1) (use online machine) create buffer
2) (use online machine) upgrade buffer authority to offline signer
3) (optional, use a separate online machine) verify the actual buffer on-chain contents
4) (use offline machine) build and copy a signature for your intent to upgrade program

> 5) (use online machine) use this signature to build and broadcast upgrade transactions on-chain

Author: Applied in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/3f8dd632196d0f0cf1c792d9ed4ff493ee0d8212

```bash
# (1) (use online machine) create buffer
solana program write-buffer <PROGRAM_FILEPATH>

# (2) (use online machine) upgrade buffer authority to offline signer

> solana program set-buffer-authority <ONLINE_SIGNER_PUB_KEY> --new-buffer-authority <OFFLINE_SIGNER_PUB_KEY>

Author: Nice catch, addressed in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/3f8dd632196d0f0cf1c792d9ed4ff493ee0d8212

```

- note, above we have to issue a separate `solana program set-buffer-authority` command (using online machine) to 
  change authority to be that of offline signer because we don't have access to offline signer private key to sign 
  up as buffer authority when running `solana program write-buffer` command using online machine (offline signer 

>   private key is stored on offline machine), and `solana program set-buffer-authority` doesn't impose that requirement.

Author: Yeah, this was an attempt to clarify limitations of `solana program write-buffer` - which I found confusing (as I mentioned in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860#discussion_r1373460162 above),

essentially this answers potential User question of "why do I need a separate command for setting the desired (offline) authority on the buffer I've created ? I'd rather set it to desired authority when creating buffer".

This might not be the best place to describe this caveat though, do you think we should:
- not mention it at all ?
- resolve it by extending `solana program write-buffer` command ?
- move this description somewhere else (perhaps under section that describes `solana program write-buffer` command) ?

>   private key is stored on offline machine), and `solana program set-buffer-authority` doesn't impose that requirement.

Author: > Let's keep it simple and add a line in the write-buffer section that explains that it's not currently possible to set the buffer authority during creation.

I've moved these changes into separate PR https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/34366, removed from this one in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/63e6e02b4199b1eeabfae15966138e039b3add06

(3) This is where you'd want to verify that program uploaded to your buffer indeed matches source code.
The most secure way to do it would be to compile program source code on a different online machine (not the same
online machine that deploys your program, because it could be compromised) and compare resulting `.so` file with
program data residing on-chain. See how you can [dump on-chain program into a file](deploy-a-program.md#dumping-a-program-to-a-file)
to verify it.

After program buffer has been verified and is believed to contain the compiled result of intended source code - we are 

> ready to sign program deploy (to upgrade existing program), fill in all required parameters below (<WHATEVER_VALUE> values).

Author: I guess I wanted to emphasise the importance of using **separate** online machine when verifying uploaded buffer **before** upgrading your program,

this way offline signing procedure isn't prone to (can't be tricked into)  signing off on "malicious" upgrade.

I guess those users who need this level of security can figure this out for themselves, trimmed as you suggested in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/3f8dd632196d0f0cf1c792d9ed4ff493ee0d8212

```bash
# or (4) (use offline machine) get a signature for your intent to upgrade program

> solana program upgrade --sign-only --fee-payer <ONLINE_SIGNER_PUB_KEY> --program-id <PROGRAM_SIGNER_PUB_KEY> --upgrade-authority <OFFLINE_SIGNER> --buffer <BUFFER_PUB_KEY> --blockhash <VALUE>

Author: Okay, applied in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/3f8dd632196d0f0cf1c792d9ed4ff493ee0d8212 (the reason I used PROGRAM_SIGNER terminology is to clarify what PROGRAM_ID actually is, but since it's used everywhere else - it's better be consistent, you are right).

# or (5) (use online machine) use this signature to build and broadcast upgrade transactions on-chain

> solana program upgrade --fee-payer <ONLINE_SIGNER> --program-id <PROGRAM_SIGNER_PUB_KEY> --upgrade-authority <OFFLINE_SIGNER_PUB_KEY> --buffer <BUFFER_PUB_KEY> --blockhash <VALUE> --signer <OFFLINE_SIGNER_SIGNATURE>

Author: Okay, applied in https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/33860/commits/3f8dd632196d0f0cf1c792d9ed4ff493ee0d8212
